you're listening to Ted talks daily families Hugh Some of us humans can get fixated on death or how we're gonna die, but we're not the only species to do so. In her Ted X Salem talk from 2020 wildlife researcher Kelly Swift offers what we can learn from crows and how they attend to the dead or or what we might have already learned from them that shows up in our rituals. Have you listened to Ted's new podcast, Far flung with Salim Russian Walla Journey Across the globe With Saleem in search of the world's most surprising and imaginative ideas, it's made possible thanks to the support of our partner, Marriott Hotels Travel expands our horizons and opens our minds to new perspectives. With hundreds of hotels that spanned the globe, Marriott Hotels is your partner in exploring what the world has to offer you and what you have to offer the world. Stay tuned after this episode to hear how Matthew Sanchez Marriott hotels, his first official beekeeper, built a micro farm and created an unexpected experience for guests, Ted Talks daily is brought to you by IBM. We all want sophisticated and simple cutting edge made user friendly. In other words, we want Ah, hybrid, and so do retailers. That's why they're going hybrid with IBM. AH, hybrid cloud approach with Watson AI helps them manage supply chains while predicting demands with ease from retail to healthcare businesses. Air going with a smarter hybrid cloud using the tools, platform and expertise of IBM. The world is going hybrid with IBM Go hybrid at IBM dot com slash hybrid Cloud. Whether we want to or not, human spend a great deal of time considering death, and it's possible we've been doing so since shortly after Homo SAPIENs first began roaming the landscape. After all, the first intentional human burial is thought to have occurred around 100,000 years ago. What might those early people have been thinking as they took the time to dig into the earth, deposit the body and carefully cover it up again? Were they trying to protect it from scavengers or stymie the spread of disease? Were they trying toe honor the deceased, or did they just not wanna have to look at a dead body without the advent of a time machine? We may never know for sure what those early people were thinking. But one thing we do know is that humans are far from alone in our attention towards the dead. Like people, some animals, including the Corvettes, the family of birds that houses the crows, Ravens, magpies and jays also seem to pay special attention to their dead. In fact, the rituals of Corvettes may have acted as the inspiration for our own. After all, it was the rave in that God sent down to teach cane how to bury his slain brother, Abel. But despite this clear recognition by early people that other animals attend to their dead, it's only fairly recently that science has really turned its attention towards this phenomenon. In fact, a formal name for this field comparative fan Atala Gee wasn't first introduced until 2016 in this growing field were beginning to appreciate what a rich place, the natural world iss with respect to how other animals interact with their dead. And it's in this growing body of knowledge that that time machine to our early ancestors might be possible. So what are we learning in this growing field? Well, right now, we can split our understanding into two main groups in the first. We have animals that display stereotyped, predictable behaviors towards their dead, and for whom. Much of what we understand about them comes from experimental studies. This group includes things like the social insects, bees and ants and termites. And for all of these animals, colony hygiene is of critical importance. And so, as a result, these animals display rigorous undertaking behaviors. In response to corpses, for example, they may physically remove carcasses from the colony. They may consume them. They may even construct tombs. We see similar hygiene driven responses in some colony living mammals. Rats, for example, will reliably berry cage mates that have been dead for 48 hours. In our other group, we have animals that display mawr variable, perhaps more charismatic behaviors and for whom. Much of what we understand about them comes from anecdotes by scientists or other observers. This is the animals whose death behaviors, I suspect, might be more familiar to folks. It includes organisms like elephants, which are well known for their attendance to their dead. Even in popular culture. In fact, they're even known to be attracted to the bones of their deceased. It also includes animals like primates, which display a wide variety of behaviors around their dead, from grooming them to, uh, prolonged attention towards them, guarding them, even the transportation of dead infants. And that's actually behavior we've seen in a number of animals like the dolphins, for example, you may remember the story of Tal Acqua, the orca in the resident J pod in the Puget Sound who during the summer of 2018 carried her dead calf for an unprecedented 17 days. Now a story like that is both heartbreaking and fascinating, but it offers far more questions than it does answers. For example, why did tell Akwa carry her calf for such a long period of time? Was she just that stricken with grief? Was she more confused by her unresponsive infant? Or is this behavior just less rare in orcas than we currently understand it to be? But for a variety of reasons, it's difficult to do the kinds of experimental studies in an animal like an orca or many of these other large mammals that might elucidate those kinds of questions. So instead, science is turning to an animal whose behaviors around death we've been thinking about since B C. e. The crows. Like insects and primates, crows also seem to pay special attention to their dead. Typically, this manifests as the discovering bird alarm, followed by the recruitment of other birds to the area to form what we call a mob. But it can be a little different than that to, for example, I've had people share with me seeing prolonged silent vigils by crows in response to deceased or dying crows. I've even had people tell me of witnessing crows, place objects like sticks and candy wrappers on or near the bodies of dead crows. And this mix of observations puts these birds in a really important place in our scheme because it suggests, on the one hand they might be like the insects displaying these very predictable behaviors. But on the other hand, we have this handful of observations that air more difficult to explain and feel a bit more like what we see in some of the mammals like primates and elephants. And like those animals, crow share an extremely large relative brain size and the kinds of dynamic social lives that might invite more complexity in how they respond to their dead. So I wanted to try and understand what was going on when crows encounter a dead crow and what this might teach us about the role of death in their world and possibly the world's of other animals as well. Even those early versions of ourselves. There's a number of different ways that we could explain why crows might be attracted to their dead. For example, Maybe it's a social opportunity, a way for them to explore why that individual died, who they were and what impact this is gonna have on the neighborhood moving forward. Maybe it's an expression of grief, like our own contemporary funerals. Or maybe it's a way that they learn about danger in their environment. While all of those explanations air worth pursuing and certainly not mutually exclusive, they're not all testable scientific questions. But that idea that dead crows might act excuse of danger that ISS. So as a graduate student, I wanted to explore that question, particularly with respect to two ideas. The first was whether they might be ableto learn new predators, specifically people based on their association with dead crows, and the second was if they might learn places associated with where they find Crowe bodies. So to do this, I would go out into some unsuspecting Seattle neighborhood, and I would start to feed a breeding pair of crows over the course of three days. And this provided a baseline for how quickly the crows would come down to a food pile. Then, on the fourth day, we would have our funeral. Linda is one of seven masks whose job was to stand there for 30 minutes with her little order of plate of dead crow, while I documented what happened. Most importantly, though, her job was to come back after a week now without the dead crow, so that we could see if the birds would treat her just like any old pedestrian. Or if instead they would exhibit behaviors like alarm calling or dive bombing that would indicate that they perceived her as a predator. Now, given that we already knew crows were capable of learning and recognizing human faces, it may come as no surprise that the majority of crows in our study did treat the masks that they saw handling dead crows as threats when they saw them over the course of the next six weeks. Now, in addition, to finding that crows were able to make associations with people based on their handling of dead crows. We also found that in the days following these funeral events, as we continue to feed them, that their willingness to come down to the food pile significantly diminished and we didn't see that same kind of decline in our control groups. So that suggests that, yes, crows can make associations with particular places where they've seen dead crows so together. What that tells us is that while we certainly shouldn't discount those other explanations, we can feel pretty confident in saying that for crows, attention to their dead might be a really important way that these animals learn about danger. That's a nice, tidy little narrative on which to hang our hats. But in life and death, things are rarely so neat. And I really came face to face with that in a follow up experiment where we were looking at how crows respond to dead crows in the absence of any kind of creditor. And suffice it to say we found that in thes cases, the wakes congee get a little more weird. You're basically seeing a confluence of three behaviors alarm, as indicated by the alarm calling aggression as indicated by the very forceful pecking by both one of the copulate Torrey birds and one of the excited by standards and sexual arousal. Clearly, this is, ah, startling and interesting to think about and talk about. But if our goal is to understand the big picture of how animals interact with their dead thing, the most important question we should ask is. Is this representative? Is this something that's happening consistently? And that's why being able to do systematic studies with crows is so valuable, because after conducting hundreds of these trials, where I was placing these dead crows out on the sidewalks on the territories of hundreds of different pairs, what we found was that no, it's not contact of any kind, whether it was sexual aggressive or even just exploratory. Onley occurred 30% of the time, so given that this wasn't representative, this was the minority. We may be tempted to just dismiss it as irrelevant, odd, creepy weird crow behavior. But what may surprise you is that behaviors like aggression or even sexual arousal aren't all that rare and certainly aren't constrained to just crows because while the popular narrative when it comes to animal death behaviors tends to focus on affiliative behaviors like grooming or guarding, that is far from the complete list of what even our closest relatives do around their dead. In fact, we've documented behaviors like biting, beating and even sex itself in a wide variety of animals, including many primates and dolphins. So where does this leave us in our understanding of animals and their death rituals? Well, for crows, it suggests that, like insects, they may have a strong, adaptive driver in their interest in their dead. In this case, it might be danger learning, and that might have acted as the inspiration for our own rituals as well. But when we look more closely, we see that there's no one simple narrative that can explain the vast array of behaviors we see in crows and many other animals, and that suggests that we're still far from completing that time machine. But it's going to be a really fascinating ride. Thank you, Yeah, I'm Salim, Russian Walla, host of Ted's new podcast, far flung, where we go around the world to unearth some of the most interesting ideas and interact with intriguing people from across the globe. Now it's time for an ad I created with our sponsor, Marriott Hotels. We're spotlighting someone who followed his curiosity and arrived at an innovative idea, and it just so happens. Toe work at Marriott Hotels. Matthew Sanchez is a chef and Marriott hotels first official beekeeper. Being a beekeeper at this point has revealed a lot to me about what we can dio to make this world a better place in which direction we can move towards, and it's been really great. He and his bees work at the Sawgrass Marriott Golf Resort and Spa in the coastal town of Pontevedra, Florida When Matthew and his colleagues were eager to bring the beast the property, they needed to find a spot where they'd be happy. Matthew found an unused piece of land on the resort, but it wasn't exactly be friendly, so he and his colleagues decided to make a micro farm that's a community of plants that includes both food crops and native plants. There were a lot of these invasive, quick growing trees everywhere, and so the first thing that we had to grow is the soil we've actually taken all the food scraps from all the restaurants. So this composting program, everything from the coffee grounds and things like that is going back into the earth. The micro farm became a passion project for Matthew and some of his colleagues. I built the gate out of sticks. I fashioned Ah, lot of what we have up there from Pallet Wood that we get shipments from here at the Mary It it's all been done by myself and others here that have pitched in with the work. The bees are very happy in their suite resort digs. Now all the bees are producing for us approximately 55 gallons of honey a year on property. So everything is hyper local, goes right back into craft cocktails, and even our spa has a premium services that they offer with honey. And we have a honey harvest, and some people really love that part. Matthew and his bees do a lot more than make honey. They also helped with pollination for miles around, and they're engaged for what's happening in the local environment. Our chefs now are are demanding more and more that their food come from farms that actually have honey bees because they know the food will have less pesticides, less chemicals and be a lot cleaner because the bees were proof of that. You know, they just don't do well. When those things were there, I was curious how people reacted when you started beekeeping. There were people surprised. You know, often people are afraid of bees. Well, it's been generally just positive reception. We have high schools and Children that come up to learn about how we keep things sustainable. Matthew and his bees are answering questions for guests and local kids alike. And for Matthew, the bees spread wonder every day. The greatest moment for me has always been when the bees leave the hive in a very organized way, with a lot of intent to go to the plants. I mean, there's an animal that wherever it goes, it leaves behind life travel, expands our horizons and opens our minds to new perspectives. With hundreds of hotels that spanned the globe, Marriott Hotels is your partner in exploring what the world has to offer you and what you have to offer the world. Learn more at Marriott hotels dot com. That's m A R R i o t t hotels dot com and let your mind travel A member of Marriott Bomb boy P R X.